Describe the effect of each of the PID components

The Proportional controller is a real time controller with no history and acts on the cross track error at the immediate present. The way I look at it, it is the back-bone of the PID controller, reacting to the error here and now. It is oblivious to the past errors and the impact that its control will have on the future errors.
The Integral controller is a backward looking controller, it applies a control when over a period of time the error doesn't reduce or takes a very long time to reduce. You can think of the integral controller similar to a guide, it sees that the proportional-differential controller has been trying hard to reduce error for a long time, and they are either taking too long to correct the error or are stuck, unable to reduce the error.
The Differential controller is a forward looking controller, it applies control taking cognizance of the fact that applying too much control might lead to an overshoot, or if the error is increasing due to non-linear environmental conditions, the differential controller can take action to make sure that the change in error isn't drastic.
Having high proportional gain can cause oscillations in the output because as the P controller applies the control it doesn't realize that due to second order effects of the motion model the cross track error will change sign, at which point the P controller will apply an opposing actuation causing the oscillation.
The D controller which looks ahead and tries to reduce the change in error to avoid quick jumps, will help avoid this oscillation by slowing the change down as we approach 0 crosstrack error. However this has a disadvantage that it will slow down the convergence of the output to 0 cross track error, and if the gains are not properly tuned, this can cause us to never reach 0 error.
The I controller can alleviate this issue introduced by the D controller. If the D Controller is slowing things down too much, the I controller's effect will become more pronounced over time, and given enough time it will overpower the D controller and cause actuation to push the CTE to 0 faster. The I controller however will cause a little jump of CTE in the opposite sign to get rid of the error history it would have accumulated.

HOw were the hyper-parameters tuned
The hyperparameters were tuned manually. First a PD controller was tried and the parameters were tuned with a low throttle, till the car could drive safely on the track. Then the speed was increased, and some errors were observed on track due to slow steering, at this point a low I gain was introduced, and then a cycle of increasing throttle and manually twiddling the P, I and D gains was follwed.
